>> Woodruff: IN LIKE A LION.
FROM TEXAS TO NEW YORK, WINTER
DEALS ANOTHER BLOW OF ICE AND
SNOW, CLOSING DOWN SCHOOLS AND
ROADS AND GROUNDING THOUSANDS OF
FLIGHTS.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY.
MONEY, MISCONDUCT AND MISTRUST.
THE DAMNING DETAILS OF A REPORT
ON THE RACIAL BIAS OF THE
FERGUSON POLICE DEPARTMENT.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, LOCKS
CHANGED, KEYS SURRENDERED.
FLORIDIANS WHO FACE FORECLOSURE
LOSE THE PLACE THEY CALL HOME.
>> THE MORTGAGE JUST STARTED
GOING UP.
AND, MY 401K, MY BANK ACCOUNT,
MY CAR THAT, THE ONLY CAR THAT I
BOUGHT MYSELF, A 2003 MONTE
CARLO, BRAND NEW, I HAD TO GET
RID OF THAT TO PAY FOR THE
MORTGAGE.
>> Ifill: AND, A DISAPPEARING
CIRCUS ACT.
THE RINGLING BROTHERS MOVE TO
RETIRE ELEPHANTS FROM
PERFORMANCES UNDER THE BIG TENT.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE STORIES
WE'RE COVERING ON TONIGHT'S PBS
NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THERE WAS NO REST
FOR THE STORM-WEARY IN MUCH OF
THE EASTERN HALF OF THE COUNTRY
TODAY.
FOR MILLIONS OF AMERICANS, MARCH
LIVED UP TO ITS "IN LIKE A LION"
REPUTATION, AS A LATE-WINTER
STORM BROUGHT HEAVY SNOW,
FOLLOWED BY FRIGID COLD.
IN THE PROCESS, THE STORM FOULED
TRAVEL-- BY LAND AND AIR...
NEW YORK'S BUSY LAGUARDIA
AIRPORT WAS CLOSED FOR SEVERAL
HOURS AFTER A DELTA FLIGHT
ARRIVING FROM ATLANTA SLID OFF A
SNOWY RUNWAY THIS MORNING.
IT CRASHED THROUGH A FENCE ATOP
A BERM JUST FEET FROM THE ICY
WATERS OF FLUSHING BAY.
THE 127 PASSENGERS AND FIVE CREW
ON BOARD WERE SAFELY EVACUATED.
NO MAJOR INJURIES WERE REPORTED.
PORT AUTHORITY OFFICIALS WOULD
NOT COMMENT ON A POSSIBLE CAUSE:
THEY SAID AN INVESTIGATION WILL
GET UNDER WAY SOON:
>> THE NTSB IS ON THE WAY TO
LAGUARDIA.
WE'LL BE COOPERATING WITH THEM
CLOSELY AS WITH DELTA.
THIS PARTICULAR RUNWAY HAD BEEN
PLOWED SHORTLY BEFORE THE
INCIDENT AND PILOTS ON OTHER
PLANES REPORTED GOOD BRAKING
ACTION.
>> Woodruff: ALL TOLD, THE
WINTER BLAST CAUSED 4,100
FLIGHTS TO BE CANCELED ACROSS
THE COUNTRY; AIRPORTS IN DALLAS,
WASHINGTON, NEW YORK, AND
PHILADELPHIA WERE HIT HARDEST.
ABOUT 74 MILLION PEOPLE WERE
UNDER WARNINGS OR ADVISORIES,
FROM NORTHERN TEXAS ON UP TO
PARTS OF NEW ENGLAND.
THE MASSIVE STORM SYSTEM ALSO
SNARLED ROAD TRAVEL.
MORE THAN 20 INCHES OF SNOW WERE
REPORTED IN WESTERN KENTUCKY.
DRIVERS ON INTERSTATE 65 SOUTH
OF LOUISVILLE WERE STUCK IN
THEIR VEHICLES OVERNIGHT AFTER
SNOW SHUT DOWN THE HIGHWAY.
THIS MOTORIST WAS STRANDED FOR
NEARLY 12 HOURS.
>> THERE'S LITERALLY HUNDREDS OF
CARS UP THERE ALONG THE
INTERSTATE THERE?
>> YEAH, THERE'S PEOPLE WITH
CHILDREN, AND YOU KNOW, NO FOOD,
NO WATER.
>> Woodruff: GREG FISCHER IS
LOUISVILLE'S MAYOR.
>> WE HAVE NO SIGNIFICANT WRECKS
OR INJURIES.
I-65 IN HARDIN COUNTY IS CLOSED
DUE TO 200 SEMIS THAT ARE STUCK
THERE.
>> Woodruff: THE NATIONAL GUARD
HAS BEEN DEPLOYED TO THE SCENE
TO RESCUE STRANDED MOTORISTS.
IT WAS A SLIPPERY SIGHT IN
NEIGHBORING TENNESSEE: ICY ROADS
MADE DRIVING DIFFICULT ACROSS
NASHVILLE.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT WAS
CLOSED AS SIX TO EIGHT INCHES OF
SNOW FELL AROUND THE NATION'S
CAPITAL.
AND THE PHILADELPHIA AREA WAS
ALSO UNDER A SNOW EMERGENCY,
WITH UP TO EIGHT INCHES OF SNOW
EXPECTED.
IRONICALLY, BOSTON DID NOT
EXPECT ANY SNOW FROM THIS STORM.
THE CITY HAS ALREADY GOTTEN MORE
THAN 100 INCHES THIS WINTER, AND
IS ONLY TWO INCHES SHY OF AN
ALL-TIME RECORD.
>> Ifill: THE STATE DEPARTMENT
WILL REVIEW E-MAILS PROVIDED BY
FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE
HILLARY CLINTON.
SHE ASKED LAST NIGHT THAT THE
DEPARTMENT RELEASE 55,000 PAGES
OF E-MAILS SHE PROVIDED.
AS SECRETARY, CLINTON USED HER
PRIVATE E-MAIL ADDRESS,
EXCLUSIVELY, FOR OFFICIAL
BUSINESS.
CURRENT SECRETARY JOHN KERRY
SAID TODAY HIS AIDES WILL REVIEW
AND RELEASE THE MATERIAL AS
QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE.
>> Woodruff: IN SAUDI ARABIA,
SECRETARY KERRY SOUGHT TODAY TO
EASE CONCERNS AMONG PERSIAN GULF
ARAB STATES OVER THE IRAN
NUCLEAR TALKS.
KERRY MET WITH THE SAUDI FOREIGN
HE ASSURED THE SAUDIS AND IRAN'S
OTHER GULF RIVALS OF FULL U.S.
SUPPORT.
AND HE SAID WASHINGTON IS NOT
SEEKING A "GRAND BARGAIN" WITH
IRAN.
>> Ifill: MORE THAN 2,000
RUSSIAN TROOPS HAVE LAUNCHED A
NEW ROUND OF LARGE-SCALE
MILITARY EXERCISES IN SOUTHERN
RUSSIA, BORDERING UKRAINE.
THE DRILLS ARE TAKING PLACE IN
RUSSIA'S CAUCASUS DISTRICTS AND
AT BASES IN ARMENIA, BREAKAWAY
REGIONS OF GEORGIA, AND CRIMEA.
THAT PROVINCE WAS ANNEXED BY
MOSCOW LAST YEAR.
THE WAR GAMES ARE EXPECTED TO
LAST UNTIL APRIL 10.
>> Woodruff: THE U.S. AMBASSADOR
TO SOUTH KOREA, MARK LIPPERT,
SAYS HE'S DOING WELL AND WILL BE
BACK AT WORK SOON, AFTER A KNIFE
ATTACK.
A KOREAN MAN SLASHED LIPPERT
ACROSS THE FACE AND ARM DURING A
BREAKFAST MEETING TODAY.
IT TOOK 80 STITCHES
TO CLOSE THE CUTS AND REPAIR
DAMAGED TENDONS AND NERVES.
SOUTH KOREAN POLICE SAY THE
ATTACKER IS A LONG-TIME OPPONENT
OF AMERICA'S ROLE IN KOREA, AND
OF THE LATEST JOINT MILITARY
DRILLS.
>> ( translated ): THE SUSPECT
KIM KI-JONG STATED THAT HE HAD
COMMITTED THIS CRIME IN ORDER TO
PROTEST AGAINST THE MILITARY
DRILLS THAT INTERRUPT THE SOUTH
AND THE NORTH'S PEACEMAKING
ATMOSPHERE.
>> Woodruff: NORTH KOREA'S
STATE-CONTROLLED MEDIA PRAISED
THE ATTACK, SAYING THE "KNIFE
SLASHES OF JUSTICE" WERE A
"DESERVED PUNISHMENT."
>> Ifill: THE LAST KNOWN EBOLA
PATIENT IN LIBERIA HEADED HOME
FROM THE HOSPITAL TODAY.
THE FIRST CASE WAS REPORTED
THERE A YEAR AGO.
THE RESULTING EPIDEMIC HAS SINCE
KILLED NEARLY 10,000 PEOPLE
ACROSS WEST AFRICA.
LIBERIA HASN'T REPORTED ANY NEW
EBOLA CASES FOR 13 DAYS, BUT IT
WON'T BE GIVEN THE "ALL CLEAR"
UNTIL 42 DAYS HAVE PASSED.
THAT'S DOUBLE THE NORMAL
INCUBATION PERIOD.
>> Woodff:ru WALL STREET EDGED
HIGHER TODAY IN ADVANCE OF
TOMORROW'S FEBRUARY JOBS REPORT.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 39 POINTS TO CLOSE ABOVE
18,100.
THE NASDAQ ROSE MORE THAN 15
POINTS,
AND THE S&P 500 ADDED 2 POINTS.
>> Ifill: THE FORMER ARCHBISHOP
OF NEW YORK, RETIRED CARDINAL
EDWARD EGAN, DIED TODAY OF A
HEART ATTACK.
EGAN PRESIDED OVER THE
ARCHDIOCESE FROM 2000 TO 2009,
AND OVERHAULED ITS FINANCES.
HE PLAYED A PROMINENT ROLE AFTER
THE 9/11 ATTACKS, BUT WAS
CRITICIZED OVER THE ALLEGED
SHIELDING OF PRIESTS ACCUSED OF
CHILD MOLESTING.
CARDINAL EGAN WAS 82 YEARS OLD.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR.
RACIAL BIAS AND ROUTINE
MISCONDUCT AMONG FERGUSON'S
POLICE OFFICERS.
MAKING SENSE OF A STILL-
STRUGGLING REAL ESTATE MARKET.
ROLLING BACK PROTECTIONS FOR
WORKERS INJURED ON THE JOB.
THE RINGLING BROTHERS MOVE TO
RETIRE ELEPHANTS FROM ITS CIRCUS
ACTS.
AND, TWO MUSICIANS TEAM UP TO
FORM A HOLOCAUST SURVIVOR BAND.
>> Ifill: FOLLOWING A DAMNING
REPORT FROM THE U.S. JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT YESTERDAY ON
MISCONDUCT BY THE FERGUSON
POLICE DEPARTMENT, NEW SHOES
BEGAN DROPPING IN THE ST.LOUIS
SUBURB TODAY-- ON THE STREETS
AND AT THE COURTHOUSE.
>> OFFICER DARREN WILSON DID NOT
HAVE TO SHOOT AND KILL MIKE
BROWN JUNIOR IN BROAD DAYLIGHT
IN THE MANNER THAT HE DID.
>> Ifill: LAWYERS FOR MICHAEL
BROWN'S FAMILY ANNOUNCED THE
FILING THIS MORNING OF A
WRONGFUL DEATH SUIT AGAINST THE
CITY AND OFFICER DARREN WILSON
HIMSELF.
>> HE HAD OTHER OPTIONS
AVAILABLE TO HIM AND THAT HE
CHOSE DEADLY FORCE AS HIS OPTION
AND WE PLAN TO DEMONSTRATE IN A
COURT OF LAW TO REASONABLE
MINDED PEOPLE THAT THE CHOICE T.
>> THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT'S
DECISION YESTERDAY NOT TO BRING
A FEDERAL CIVIL RIGHTS CASE
AGAINST WILSON PAVED THE WAY FOR
THE FAMILY'S CIVIL SUIT, BUT AN
EXTENSIVE FEDERAL INVESTIGATION
INTO FERGUSON POLICE PRACTICES
ALSO UNCOVERED NEW DETAILS ABOUT
THE DEPARTMENT'S RACIALLY BIASED
AND PROFIT-DRIVEN ENFORCEMENT
AND PROSECUTION.
>> AS DETAILED IN WHAT I WILL
CALL OUR SEARING REPORT-- AND IT
IS SEARING-- ALSO RELEASED BY
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT TODAY,
THIS INVESTIGATION FOUND A
COMMUNITY THAT WAS DEEPLY
POLARIZED, A COMMUNITY WHERE
DEEP DISTRUST AND HOSTILITY
OFTEN CHARACTERIZED INTERACTIONS
BETWEEN POLICE AND AREA
RESIDENTS, A COMMUNITY WITH
LOCAL AUTHORITIES CONSISTENTLY
APPROACHED LAW ENFORCEMENT NOT
AS A MEANS FOR PROTECTING PUBLIC
SAFETY BUT AS A WAY TO GENERATE
REVENUE.
>> Ifill: AMONG THE INCIDENTS
DETAILED IN THE REPORT:
IN 2012, AN AFRICAN AMERICAN MAN
WAS "COOLING OFF IN HIS CAR"
AFTER A BASKETBALL GAME, WHEN
POLICE ACCUSED HIM OF BEING A
PEDOPHILE BECAUSE THERE WERE
CHILDREN IN THE PARK; HE WAS
ARRESTED AT GUNPOINT AND CHARGED
WITH EIGHT CRIMES WHICH, THE MAN
SAID, LED TO THE LOSS OF HIS
JOB.
THAT SAME YEAR, OFFICERS SENT A
POLICE DOG TO DRAG A 16-YEAR-OLD
SUSPECTED OF STEALING A CAR OUT
OF A CLOSET BY HIS LEGS.
IN 2007, AN AFRICAN AMERICAN
WOMAN RECEIVED PARKING TICKETS
TOTALING $150.
OVER TIME SHE WAS FORCED TO PAY
$150 IN FINES AND FEES AND STILL
OWES THE CITY MORE.
THE DEPARTMENT FOUND RACIST
E-MAILS LIKE THE ONE THAT SAID,
"PRESIDENT OBAMA WOULDN'T NUMBER
OFFICE LONG BECAUSE WHAT BLACK
MAN HOLDS A STEADY JOB FOR FOUR
YEARS."
FERGUSON'S MAYOR SAID ONE OF THE
EMPLOYEES RESPONSIBLE FOR THOSE
E-MAILS HAS BEEN FIRED.
TWO MORE HAVE BEEN SUSPENDED.
>> LET ME BE CLEAR, THIS TYPE OF
BEHAVIOR WILL NOT BE TOLERATED
IN THE FERGUSON POLICE
DEPARTMENT OR ANY DEPARTMENT OF
THE CITY OF FERGUSON.
>> Ifill: THE MAYOR PROMISED
TO DO BETTER AS A CITY, BUT LAST
NIGHT, PROTESTERS RETURNED TO
FERGUSON'S STREETS.
WE TURN NOW TO TWO MEMBERS OF
THE INDEPENDENT COMMISSION SET
UP BY THE STATE OF MISSOURI TO
LOOK INTO THE EVENTS IN
FERGUSON.
STARSKY WILSON CHAIRS THE
COMMISSION, AND IS PASTOR OF ST.
JOHN'S CHURCH IN ST. LOUIS,
AND KEVIN AHLBRAND IS A POLICE
DETECTIVE IN ST. LOUIS AND
PRESIDENT OF THE MISSOURI
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE.
TONIGHT, HE'S IN SAN DIEGO.
REVEREND WILSON, THAT WAS JUST
SCRAPING THE SURFACE OF THE
FINDINGS IN THAT DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE REPORT.
WHAT SURPRISED YOU THE MOST
ABOUT WHAT YOU READ?
>> QUITE FRANKLY, WHILE THE
REPORT WAS DISHEARTENING, THE
OVERALL FINDINGS WERE NOT
SURPRISING.
WE KNEW, BASED ON THE TESTIMONY
WE HAVE HEARD FROM PEOPLE NOT
ONLY IN THE STREETS BUT THROUGH
OUR COMMISSION'S WORK OVER THE
FIRST 100 DAYS THAT PEOPLE
EXPERIENCE RACIALIZED POLICING,
THAT THEY BELIEVED IN THEIR
TRUTH THAT THIS WAS DRIVEN BY
PROFIT.
WE NOW SEE THE EVIDENCE OF THAT.
THE THINGS THAT SURPRISE MEADE,
QUITE FRANKLY, WERE THE KIND OF
SALACIOUS NARRATIVE OF THE FACT
THAT WE HAVE AN E-MAIL FROM FROM
THE FINANCE DIRECTOR OF THE CITY
DIRECTLY TO THE CHIEF OF POLICE
SUGGESTING THAT REVENUES, RAISED
THROUGH DIRECT POLICING
PRACTICES.
THESE ARE THE KINDS OF THINGS
THAT SHOULD NEVER BE IN PUBLIC--
IN THE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION OF
JUSTICE, QUITE FRANKLY, AND
THEY'RE THE KIND OF THINGS THAT
UNDERMINE THE TRUST IN
GOVERNANCE THAT WE NEED FOR THE
PROJECT OF INCLUSIVE DEMOCRACY
TO WORK.
>> Ifill: KEVIN AHLBRAND, WHAT
STRUCK YOU, ESPECIALLY THIS PART
ABOUT POLICING FOR PROFIT THAT
REVEREND WILSON JUST BROUGHT UP?
WHAT STRUCK YOU THE MOST ABOUT
THAT REPORT?
>> WELL-- AND BASICALLY, THAT,
THE WHOLE MUNICIPAL COURT
SYSTEM.
WE'VE KNOWN FOR A LONG TIME THAT
IT'S BEEN A PROBLEM.
WE HAVE NEVER CONDOAND TICKET
QUOTE AS.
WE ARE VEHEMENTLY OPPOSED TO
THEM.
WE ARE SUPPORTING A BILL
CURRENTLY MAKING THE WAY THROUGH
THE MISSOURI LEGISLATURE WHICH
WOULD REDUCE THE PERCENTAGE THAT
CITIES COULD USE FEES AND FINES
FOR THEIR BUDGET, AND WE'VE
ALWAYS BEEN OPPOSED TO THAT.
PART OF THE BIG PROBLEM IS THE
POLICE OFFICER HAS TO WRITE "X"
NUMBER OF TICKETS, THAT'S TIME
HE CAN'T BE OUT IN THE COMMUNITY
DOING COMMUNITY-ORIENTED
POLICING AND THAT'S WHAT WE'VE
GOTTEN AWAY FROM AND WHAT I
BELIEVE WE NEED TO GET BACK TO.
>> Ifill: REVEREND WILSON,
WERE YOU DISAPPOINTED THAT
DARREN WILSON WAS NOT CHARGED?
>> I RECOGNIZE THAT'S A
DIFFICULT HURDLE TO CLIMB, TO
PROVE INTENT, TO PROVE SOMEONE'S
MINDSET, WE HAVE ALWAYS KNOWN
WHAT WOULD BE SIGNIFICANT OR
DIFFICULT FOR THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT TO DO.
SO I'M NOT NECESSARILY SURPRISED
BY THAT, EITHER, QUITE FRANKLY.
WHAT CONCERNS ME IS THE
CONNECTION BETWEEN THESE TWO
POINTS.
IF WE RECALL, ONE OF THE THINGS
WE SEE IN THE REPORT IS THAT
SOME 90-PLUS PERCENT OF THOSE
WHO ARE STOPPED FOR WALKING IN
THE STREET IN FERGUSON ARE
AFRICAN AMERICAN.
THIS WHOLE INCIDENT WITH DARREN
WILSON AND MICHAEL BROWN BEGAN
BECAUSE OF SOMEONE STOPPING
SOMEONE IN THE MIDDLE OF THE
STREET.
SO WHEN WE THINK ABOUT THE
CULTURE THAT'S CREATED IN THE
POLICPOLICE DEPARTMENT AND WE CT
IT TO THE INCIDENTS OF THAT
PARTICULAR DAY, THEN WE SEE HOW
THE LEADERSHIP AND CULTURE NIEDZ
TO BE REFORMED, AND THAT IS WHAT
CONCERNS ME MORE THAN ANYTHING
ELSE.
>> Ifill: KEVIN AHLBRAND,
BECAUSE YOU BOTH SERVED ON THE
FERGUSON COMMISSION TOGETHER,
MAYBE YOU TALKED ABOUT THIS, BUT
WHAT ABOUT THIS IDEA OF A
CULTURE THAT NOT ONLY REWARDED
OFFICERS FOR WRITING MP
TICKETS FOR WHAT SEEMED TO BE A
PASSING VIOLATIONS -- BUT ALSO,
THAT COULD BE THE SITUATION, SAY
STOPPING SOMEONE FOR WALKING IN
THE STREET-- THAT COULD
ESCALATE?
IS THAT TYPICAL?
IS THAT FAIR TO SAY THAT THAT IS
WHAT MANY PEOPLE IN THE FERGUSON
DEPARTMENT EXPECTED?
>> WELL, GWEN, I'M NOT SURE, AND
THE WHOLE MICHAEL BROWN-DARREN
WILSON CASE ABOUT WHY HE WAS
STOPPED, THERE ARE ONLY TWO
PEOPLE THAT KNOW THAT.
SO I DON'T THINK THAT'S A GOOD
EXAMPLE.
THIS IS NOT ONLY A POLICE
PROBLEM.
THIS IS A SOCIETAL PROBLEM, AND
WE HAVE TO GET BACK TO, LIKE I
SAID BEFORE, THE
COMMUNITY-ORIENTED POLICING.
MUCH OF THE PROBLEMS WITH POLICE
DEPARTMENTS ARE THE FEDERAL COPS
GRANTS WENT AWAY.
CITIES FACE BUDGET CRISES.
POLICE DEPARTMENTS WERE
DOWNSIZED, AND A LOT OF THESE
DEPARTMENTS, THEY DO NOT HAVE
TIME TO GET OUT THERE IN THE
COMMUNITY AND DO WHAT THEY
REALLY NEED TO DO.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU TO
EXPAND ON THAT.
I'M CURIOUS WHAT YOU MEAN WHEN
YOU SAID "COMMUNITY-ORIENTED
POLICING."
OF IF ALL THE INCIDENTS IN THE
REPORT ARE TRUE-- DOGS BEING
SENT AFTER INDIVIDUALS, OR
PEOPLE BEING PULLED OVER BECAUSE
OF A NONFUNCTIONING TRAFFIC--
PARKING LIGHT THAT TURNED OUT TO
BE FUNCTIONING AND THEN PUT IN
JAIL.
IF THESE KINDS OF THINGS HAPPEN,
HOW DO YOU SEPARATE THAT OUT
FROM THE KIND OF SITUATION THAT
DARREN WILSON FOUND HIMSELF
INVOLVED IN THAT ESCALATED SO
TRAGICALLY?
>> WELL, AND I DON'T REALLY WANT
TO TALK ABOUT ANECDOTAL
INCIDENCES, BUT, HEY, IF THERE
ARE SYSTEMIC PROBLEMS, I BELIEVE
THAT THOSE PROBLEMS START FROM
THE TOP, IF THEY TRULY ARE
SYSTEMIC.
THE RANK AND FILE GO OUT AND DO
WHAT THEY ARE TOLD TO DO.
SO I THINK WE NEED TO START
LOOKING AT MANAGEMENT AND SOME N
SOME OF THESE INSTANCES.
AND LIKE I SAID, THE TIME SPENT
WRITING TICKETS IS THE TIME THEY
CANNOT BE OUT THERE DOING THE
PROPER THINGS.
>> Ifill: STARSKY WILSON, YOUR
JOB AS CHAIRMAN OF THIS
COMMISSION IS TO TRY TO FIGURE A
WAY FORWARD.
AFTER A YEAR OF THIS AND NOW
WITH THIS REPORT ON THE BOOKS,
DO YOU SEE A WAY FORWARD?
>> I DO SEE A WAY FORWARD.
I ENCOURAGE PEOPLE WHO READ THIS
202 PAGE REPORT TO READ IT TO
THE END BECAUSE THERE IS HOPE
AROUND PAGE 90 WHEN WE BEGIN TO
LOOK AT THE RECOMMENDATIONS
GOING FORWARD.
THEY'RE THE KINDS OF THINGS KEV
SIN TALKING ABOUT, TO REORIENT
POLICING IN THIS PARTICULAR
DEPARTMENT AND, QUITE FRANKLY,
REGIONALLY, ON THINGS LIKE
COMMUNITY-ORIENTED POLICING, TO
BEGIN TO LOOK AT AND TO
APPROPRIATE NOT ONLY COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT BUT IN SOME SPACES,
COMMUNITY ACCOUNTABILITY.
AND TO TAKE THIS REPORT AND TO
PUT IT IN CONVERSATION WITH THE
21st CENTURY TASK FORCE
REPORT THAT WE GOT FROM THE
PRESIDENT'S TASK FORCE ON MONDAY
TO CONTINUE TO REVIEW THE
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEMS.
TO KEVIN'S POINT, I THINK
APPROPRIATE, THIS IS NOT JUST
ABOUT POLICING.
IT IS ABOUT POLICING AS
CONNECTED TO THE MUNICIPAL
COURTS, AND OUR REGION, IT IS
UNIQUELY DRIVEN BY MUNICIPAL
FRAGMENTATION THAT COSTS MONEY
AND SO THE REVENUE SOURCE THAT
IS MOST CONTROLLABLE IS THAT
COMES FROM TICKETS, FINES, AND
FEE, AND THAT'S THE SPICKET THAT
GOT TURNED ON IN THIS SITUATION.
>> Ifill: KEVIN AHLBRAND, DOES
THAT MEAN THE BASIC STRUCTURE
HAS TO BE REORDERED, WHETHER
IT'S EXPANDING THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT IN THE CITY OR CHANGE
THE MUNICIPAL COURT STRUCTURE?
>> WELL, AND I THINK THAT'S A
BIG TASK TO TAKE.
THERE ARE 65, I BELIEVE, POLICE
DEPARTMENTS IN ST. LOUIS COUNTY.
I THINK THAT'S WAY TOO MANY.
I THINK THE DISCUSSION-- AND IT
HAS STARTED-- THAT WE NEED TO
LOOK AT REORGANIZING THIS AND
IT'S GOING TO TAKE A LONG TIME.
BUT IF WE GET THE RIGHT PEOPLE
INVOLVED AND THE COMMUNITY
BEHIND US, I THINK WE CAN GET IT
DONE.
>> Ifill: KEVIN AHLBRAND, THE
HEAD OF THE MISSOURI FRATERNAL
ORDER OF POLICE, AND THE
REVEREND STARSKY WILSON,
ST. JOHN'S CHURCH AND CHAIRMAN
OF THE FERGUSON COMMISSION.
THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> THANK
>> Woodruff: ONE OF THE GAPING
WOUNDS OF THE HOUSING CRISIS,
AND THE GREAT RECESSION THAT
IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWED IT, WAS A
HUGE JUMP IN THE NUMBER OF
FORECLOSURES IN CITIES AND
REGIONS AROUND THE COUNTRY.
IN MANY WAYS, THE HOUSING MARKET
TODAY IS HEALTHIER.
BUT AS OUR ECONOMICS
CORRESPONDENT PAUL SOLMAN TELLS
US, THAT PAINFUL WOUND STILL
STINGS IN A NUMBER OF
COMMUNITIES.
HIS STORY IS PART OF OUR ONGOING
REPORTING: "MAKING SENSE," WHICH
AIRS EVERY THURSDAY ON THE
NEWSHOUR.
>> WHAT I NEED TO DO WITH YOU
NOW IS I NEED TO WALK THROUGH
THE HOUSE, MAKE SURE IT'S IN
BROOM-SWEPT CONDITION..
>> Reporter: DESPITE WHAT YOU
MAY HAVE HEARD, THE FORECLOSURE
CRISIS IS FAR FROM OVER,
ESPECIALLY IN FLORIDA, WHICH
LEADS THE NATION: MORE THAN
300,000 CASES STILL PENDING;
ANOTHER HALF A MILLION
HOMEOWNERS DELINQUENT; HUNDREDS
OF THOUSANDS OF MODIFIED LOANS
ABOUT TO BALLOON IN PAYMENTS.
TEN DAYS AGO, DAVID-- WE'VE BEEN
ASKED NOT TO USE HIS LAST NAME--
WAS IN THE FINAL STAGE OF THE
PROCESS: CASH FOR KEYS.
HE'D BOUGHT THIS HOUSE, ON A
QUIET STREET IN FORT MYERS, IN
2007 FOR $139,000, TO LIVE IN
WITH HIS BROTHER AND PARENTS.
HIS FATHER DIED SOON AFTER.
>> BY SIGNING THIS YOU ARE
HEREBY RELEASING ALL CLAIMS.
IF YOU COME BACK TO THIS
PROPERTY IT'S CONSIDERED
TRESPASSING.
>> Reporter: FOR A WHILE,
BROTHERS AND MOTHER POOLED THEIR
INCOMES FROM LOW-LEVEL JOBS AND
HER WIDOW'S PENSION TO MAKE THE
MONTHLY PAYMENT.
THEN, ONE DAY IN 2010, DAVID
CAME HOME TO FIND THAT HIS
MOTHER, IN HER LATE 50s, HAD HAD
A NEAR-FATAL HEART ATTACK.
>> I HAD TO TAKE CARE OF HER.
MY BROTHER WORKS, I COULDN'T
WORK, I HAD TO TAKE CARE OF HER.
>> Reporter: WITH NO HEALTH
INSURANCE (THIS WAS PRE-
OBAMACARE), THE FAMILY FELL
BEHIND.
THEIR ORIGINAL MORTGAGE
SERVICING COMPANY, LITTON,
AGREED TO MODIFY THE LOAN,
REDUCING THE INTEREST RATE (BUT
NOT THE PRINCIPAL), TO CUT
PAYMENTS BY A THIRD.
TWO MONTHS LATER, THOUGH,
LITTON TRANSFERRED THE LOAN TO
GREEN TREE.
>> GREEN TREE TOOK OVER.
THE MORTGAGE JUST STARTED GOING
UP.
AND, MY 401K, MY BANK ACCOUNT,
MY CAR THAT, THE ONLY CAR THAT I
BOUGHT MYSELF, A 2003 MONTE
CARLO, BRAND NEW, I HAD TO GET
RID OF THAT TO PAY FOR THE
MORTGAGE.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, AN
INDEPENDENT WATCHDOG FOUND THAT
GREEN TREE FAILED EIGHT OUT OF
29 TESTS OF HOW IT TREATED
STRUGGLING BORROWERS.
BUT BY THEN, THE HOUSE WAS
ALREADY IN FORECLOSURE, SADDLED
WITH $25,000 IN BACK PAYMENTS,
FEES AND PENALTIES DUE, ON A
PROPERTY NOW APPRAISED AT
$45,000.
REAL ESTATE AGENT MARC JOSEPH IS
WHOLLY SYMPATHETIC, BUT HE CAN
SEE THE LENDER'S POINT OF VIEW.
>> HE SIGNED UP FOR $139,800.
HE SIGNED UP FOR THAT.
IF I WAS HOLDING THE MORTGAGE,
AND I'M WATCHING TV RIGHT NOW,
YOU OWE ME $139,000, GET OUT!
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S THE LAW.
BUT THE HOUSE IS NOW WORTH ONLY
A THIRD OF THAT, AS DAVID HAS
EXPLAINED TO HIS LENDERS.
>> "OH, WE'LL HELP YOU, WE'LL
HELP YOU," AND THEN THEY GIVE ME
THE RUNAROUND AND NOTHING GETS
DONE.
AND NOW I'M ACTUALLY HOMELESS
ONCE I HAND YOU THIS KEY.
I'M HOMELESS.
IN THE LITTLE FORD EXPLORER.
I KNOW IT'S NOT YOUR FAULT.
>> I WISH I COULD DO A LOT MORE,
BUT THE ONLY THING I CAN DO FOR
YOU AT THIS PARTICULAR MOMENT IS
GIVE YOU THIS CHECK AND WISH YOU
THE BEST THAT THIS GETS YOU
SOMEWHERE.
AND I'M SORRY.
>> Reporter: AND SO, WITH $1,500
IN EXCHANGE FOR CLEARING OUT,
DAVID, HIS BROTHER, MOTHER AND 0
FLORIDA FAMILIES WHO HAVE LOST
THEIR HOMES SINCE 2007.
5.5 MILLION HOMES LOST
NATIONWIDE.
IN FACT, WITH ONE OUT OF FOUR
FLORIDA HOMES HIT WITH A
FORECLOSURE NOTICE IN RECENT
YEARS, IT'S HARD TO MEET ANYONE
IN THIS STATE WHO HASN'T BEEN
TOUCHED BY THE CRISIS.
RANDY MILLER, WHO WAS CHANGING
THE LOCKS ON DAVID'S HOUSE,
MANAGED TO GET A LOAN
MODIFICATION TO HANG ON TO HIS
DREAM HOME.
BUT EVEN THAT WASN'T ENOUGH WHEN
HE AND HIS WIFE BOTH LOST THEIR
JOBS.
>> WE WERE JUST RIDING AROUND,
TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WHAT WE WAS
GONNA DO AS THINGS GOT WORSE AND
WORSE AND WORSE, AND, SEEING ALL
THE FORECLOSURES, AND THOUGHT,
YOU KNOW, THERE HAS TO BE SOME
WAY TO GET INTO THIS BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: AND SO THEY STARTED
trashout4u.com.
>> WE WOULD DO THE LOCK CHANGES,
THE INSPECTION, THE CLEAN OUT,
THE POOLS.
WE WAS DOING ALL OF IT.
>> Reporter: HAPPY ENDING FOR
THE MILLERS.
TRAGIC ENDING FOR THE MELTONS.
>>  IF THE SUN REFUSED TO
SHINE, I WOULD STILL BE LOVING
>> Reporter: WE MET STREET
MUSICIAN JIMMY MELTON WHILE
TAPING IN FORT MYERS.
HIS FATHER HAD BEEN A SCIENCE
TEACHER HERE FOR 35 YEARS.
IN 2007, EDWARD MELTON JUNIOR,
NEEDING A NEW ROOF ON HIS HOUSE,
FELL FOR A REFINANCING PITCH BY
AMERICAN HOME MORTGAGE, NOW OUT
OF BUSINESS.
>> AND THEY HAD GIVEN HIM A
FOUR-OPTION ADJUSTABLE RATE
MORTGAGE, ONLY NOT ALLING OWHIM
TO KNOW ALL THE DETAILS OF THE
PAYBACK ON IT.
>> Reporter: WHEN HIS FATHER
FOUND OUT...
>> HE TRIED TO GET THEM TO
MODIFY IT FOR OVER TWO YEARS,
AND EVERY TIME IT WAS THE SAME
ANSWER, THEY COULDN'T WORK WITH
HIM, THEY COULDN'T DO IT AT THIS
TIME, THAT KIND OF THING.
ONE DAY, HE JUST FINALLY HAD
ENOUGH, AFTER OVER TWO YEARS OF
FIGHTING, AND ABOUT 4:15 IN THE
MORNING, HE TOOK HIS LIFE.
>> Reporter: JIMMY MELTON HELD
ON TO THE HOUSE FOR FIVE AND A
HALF YEARS, FIGHTING
FORECLOSURE.
BUT IT'S FINALLY BEEN AUCTIONED
OFF.
HE'LL BE OUT BY APRIL FOOL'S
DAY.
>> YOU CAN TRANSFER ME TO MY
POINT OF CONTACT BUT THEY'RE NOT
GOING FOIK UP THE PHONE, RIGHT?
AND THEN THERE'S TANIA AGATHOS,
WHO WONDERS HOW MUCH LONGER SHE
CAN HANG ON TO HER HOME.
>> DECEMBER 24, CHRISTMAS EVE, I
HAD A LOVELY KNOCK ON THE DOOR,
AND THEY SERVED ME WITH PAPERS.
>> Reporter: ON, ON CHRISTMAS
EVE?
>> ON CHRISTMAS EVE.
>> Reporter: AGATHOS PAID
$69,00FOR 0 HER TOWNHOUSE IN
2002, REFINANCED FOR $89,000 IN
2004.
>> Reporter: WHEN THE BOTTOM
FELL OUT OF FLORIDA'S HOUSING
MARKET, SHE FELL INTO A SPIRAL
OF UNEMPLOYMENT, DIVORCE, A BIG
SURGERY BILL, EVEN WITH
INSURANCE, AND PERSONAL
BANKRUPTCY.
SHE'S BEEN ASKING HER LENDERS TO
MODIFY HER MORTGAGE FOR YEARS.
>> THEY SAID THAT THEY WOULD NOT
EVEN DISCUSS IT WITH ME UNTIL I
WAS THREE MONTHS BEHIND IN MY
MORTGAGE PAYMENTS.
>> Reporter: YOU MEAN YOU HAD
BEEN PAYING.
>> I HAD BEEN PAYING, I WAS 100%
UP TO DATE ON EVERYTHING.
>> Reporter: SO THEY WERE
ESSENTIALLY FORCING YOU TO STOP
PAYING?
>> CORRECT.
>> Reporter: WHICH YOU DID, I
TAKE IT?
>> OH YES, I HAD NO, I DIDN'T
HAVE A CHOICE ANYMORE.
>> Reporter: BY THE TIME SHE
TECHNICALLY QUALIFIED, SHE WAS
TOO DEEP IN THE HOLE TO IMBCL
OUT, SHE SAYS, AS PENALTIES AND
FEES WERE TACKED ON TO THE
PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST.
BUT INSTEAD OF MODIFYING THE
LOAN, THE LENDERS KEPT PASSING
HER FROM ONE CASE MANAGER TO
ANOTHER, WHILE THE TAB STEADILY
GREW.
ASSESSED EXPENSES, $1,700 AND
THEN PAST DUE PAYMENTS, OF NOW,
$32,000.
>> CORRECT.
>> Reporter: JUST TO RENEW YOUR
MORTGAGE PAYMENTS, WHICH THEN
WOULD COME IN MONTHLY AFTER
THAT.
>> CORRECT.
I DON'T KNOW IF I'M GONNA HAVE A
LOCK ON MY DOOR TOMORROW WHEN I
COME HOME FROM WORK.
>> Reporter: SO AGATHOS WAITS
FOR THE FINAL STAGE OF
FORECLOSURE.
MEANWHILE, SAYS MARC JOSEPH...
>> THERE IS STILL A LOT OF WHAT
THEY CALLED "SHADOW INVENTORY,"
THAT NOBODY WANTS TO TALK ABOUT,
IT'S NOT THERE.
IT'S STILL THERE.
>> Reporter: THE FORECLOSURES
THAT ARE GONNA HAPPEN, BUT
HAVEN'T HAPPENED YET.
>> THEY'RE GOING TO HAPPEN,
BECAUSE PEOPLE DID LOAN
MODIFICATIONS WHICH WAS ONLY A
BAND-AID ON THE PROBLEM.
SO GUESS WHO I'M OUT DOING
FORECLOSURES ON NOW?
THE PEOPLE THAT DID THE LOAN
MODIFICATIONS, AND NOW THEY'RE
BEING RESET BACK TO THEIR OLD
PAYMENTS.
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S THE
SHADOW INVENTORY THAT'S OUT
THERE AND COULD FLOOD THE
MARKET?
>> THIS IS A WHOLE NEW WAVE OF
WHAT I SEE COMING.
>> Reporter: A WAVE OF PEOPLE
LIKE DAVID, PERHAPS.
WHERE HAS HE BEEN LIVING SINCE
GETTING CASH FOR HIS KEYS?
>> I GOT A STORE, I GOT A PLACE
TO WALK THE DOGS.
>> Reporter: A TRUCK STOP.
>> THEY GOT SHOWERS IN HERE,
HOPEFULLY I DON'T GET KICKED
OUT, BUT, THIS IS WHERE I'M
CALLING HOME RIGHT NOW.
FROM A HOUSE TO A TRUCK, THIS IS
WHERE I'M AT.
>> Reporter: THIS IS ECONOMICS
CORRESPONDENT PAUL SOLMAN,
REPORTING FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR
FROM A TRUCK STOP IN FORT MYERS,
FLORIDA.
>> Woodruff: WORKERS
COMPENSATION BENEFITS HAVE LONG
PLAYED A CRITICAL ROLE IN THE
AMERICAN LABOR MARKET.
SIMPLY PUT, BUSINESSES PAY
INSURANCE FOR CLAIMS IF A WORKER
IS INJURED ON THE JOB.
THE EMPLOYEE GIVES UP THE RIGHT
TO SUE, BUT THE EMPLOYER PAYS
MEDICAL COSTS AND PART OF THE
WAGES WHILE THE WORKER RECOVERS.
BUT A NEW INVESTIGATION BY PRO-
PUBLICA AND NPR FINDS WORKERS'
COMP IS BEING SUBSTANTIALLY
OVER THE PAST COUPLE DECADES,
LEGISLATORS IN MORE THAN 30
STATES HAVE PASSED LAWS REDUCING
BENEFITS OR MAKING IT MORE
DIFFICULT IN MANY CASES TO
QUALIFY FOR THEM.
STATES HAVE ALSO CUT OFF
BENEFITS AFTER ARBITRARY TIME
LIMITS.
LET'S HEAR FROM ONE OF THE
WORKERS PROFILED.
JOEL RAMIREZ WAS PARALYZED IN A
WAREHOUSE ACCIDENT AFTER A 900
POUND CRATE FELL ON HIM IN 2009.
LAST JUNE, HIS HOME HEALTH AIDE
WAS TAKEN AWAY AFTER THE STATE
OF CALIFORNIA PASSED A NEW LAW.
HIS WIFE, LUPITA, GAVE UP HER
JOB TO HELP HIM, INCLUDING WITH
HIS PERSONAL HYGIENE.
>> WHEN HE WAS WALKING BEFORE,
HE'S VERY, VERY A STRONG MAN.
( CRYING )
EVEN I SAID I COULDN'T IMAGINE
WHEN I SAW HIM LIKE THIS.
IT DESTROYED MY SOUL, YOU KNOW.
>> THERE WAS MY MOM HERE, BUT
SHE'S 75 YEARS OLD.
OH, MY GOD, I WAS TRYING TO
CLEAN UP, AND I, AND I SAID I CT
EVEN DO IT RIGHT NOW.
HOW AM I GOING TO DO IT WHEN I
GET OLDER.
M
>> Woodruff: LET'S LOOK MORE
CLOSELY AT THE IMPACT OF ALL
THIS.
MICHAEL GRABELL WAS THE LEAD
REPORTER ON THIS FOR PRO-
PUBLICA.
AND REPORTER HOWARD BURKESS OF
NPR COLLABORATED WITH HIM.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
HOWARD BURKESS, YOU LISTEN TO
THE STORY OF JOEL RAMIREZ, AND
YOU JUST WONDER HOW COULD HE GET
BY?
>> WELL, HE HAD A VERY DIFFICULT
TIME GETTING BY.
HE DIDN'T GET ENOUGH IN WORKERS
COMPENSATION BENEFITS TO REPLACE
THE HOME HEALTH AIDE HIMSELF.
IT WOULD HAVE COST HIM ABOUT
$500 A DAY TO DO THAT.
HE GOT BARELY MORE THAN THAT IN
AN ENTIRE WEEK OF BENEFITS.
SO IT WAS A STRUGGLE.
IT WAS A STRUGGLE FOR THE
FAMILY.
AND THERE WERE TIMES WHEN HE WAS
LEFT TO SIT IN HIS OWN FECES FOR
HOURS BECAUSE THERE WAS NO ONE
THERE TO HELP HIM GET CLEAN.
>> Woodruff: ONE OF THE
CONSEQUENCES OF BEING PARALYZED
WAS THAT HE WAS BOWEL
INCONTINENT.
MICHAEL GRABELL, TELL US ABOUT
THE CHANGES THAT HAVE HAPPENED
IN WORKERS COMPENSATION LAWS
OVER THE LAST FEW DECADES.
>> WELL, WHAT STATES HAVE DONE
IS REALLY THREE THINGS.
THEY'VE CUT BENEFITS.
THEY MADE IT HARDER TO QUALIFY
FOR WORKERS COMP BENEFITS BY
RAISING LEGAL STANDARDS.
AND THEY'VE ALSO CREATED A
NUMBER OF HURDLES TO GETTING
MEDICAL CARE.
SO WHAT'S HAPPENING TO THESE
WORKERS IS VERY QUICKLY, THEY'RE
SEEING LOWER BENEFITS AND
THEY'RE SEEING EXACTLY THE
FINANCIAL DOWNFALL THAT WORKERS
COMPENSATION WAS SUPPOSED TO
PREVENT, OR THEY'RE FACING--
THEY'RE HAVING TO BATTLE FOR
YEARS IN THESE ADMINISTRATIVE
COURTS TO GET THE MEDICAL CARE,
EVEN PROSTHETICS IN SOME CASES,
THAT THEIR DOCTORS RECOMMEND.
>> Woodruff: HOWARD BURKESS,
WHY ARE SO MANY STATES MOVING TO
CUT WORKERS COMP?
>> WELL, THERE ARE A COUPLE OF
THINGS THAT HAVE OCCURRED.
ONE IS MEDICAL COSTS HAVE
INCREASED SO DRAMATICALLY OVER
THE YEARS.
BUT THE OTHER THING IS WE'VE HAD
A COUPLE OF RECESSIONS IN THE
LAST 15 YEARS, AND STATES ARE
COMPETING WITH EACH OTHER
FIERCELY FOR BUSINESS, AND ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT BUSINESSES
COMPLAIN ABOUT ALL THE TIME IS
THE COST OF WORKERS COMPENSATION
INSURANCE PREMIUMS.
SOME BUSINESSES ARE
SELF-INSURED.
IT'S THE COSTS THAT THEY PAY
WORKERS WHEN THEY'RE INJURED ON
THE JOB.
AND SO THERE'S BEEN WHAT SOME
PEOPLE HAVE CHARACTERIZED AS A
RACE TO THE BOTTOM.
AS BUSINESSES COMPLAIN ABOUT
THESE COSTS, THEY GO TO
LAWMAKERS IN STATE CAPITALS
AROUND THE COUNTRY AND SAY,
"THIS IS ONE THING YOU CAN DO TO
HELP US COMPETE WITH THE NEXT
STATE."
AND, OF COURSE, EACH STATE IS
DROPPING COSTS, IS LOWERING
COSTS TAN THE
NEXT STATE, EVEN AS THEY
CONTINUE TO CUT COST GLOOZ.
>> Woodruff: MICHAEL GRABELL
SO WORKERS ARE PAYING LESS THAN
THEY USED TO FOR WORKERS COMP?
>> RIGHT, DESPITE THE DRUMBEAT
FOR COMPLAINTS OF WORKERS COMP,
WE LOOKED AT THE DATA AND A
NUMBER OF STUDIES SHOW THAT
EMPLOYERS ARE PAYING THE LOWEST
RATES THAT THEY'VE PAID FOR
WORKERS COMPENSATION INSURANCE
SINCE THE 1970s.
AND THERE'S ONLY A FEW STATES
THAT ARE PAYING ANYWHERE CLOSE
TO WHAT THEY WERE PAYING IN THE
70s.
AND THE OTHER THING IS THAT
INSURANCE COMPANIES ARE ALSO
DOING WELL.
IN 2013, THEY HAD AN 18% PROFIT
ON THE WORKERS COMP LINE, WHICH
WAS THEIR BEST YEAR SINCE THE
1990s.
AND IF YOU LOOK AT THE
COMPARISON OF HOW MUCH WORKERS
COMP EATS UP OF AN AVERAGE
WORKER'S PAYCHECKIT'S SMALL
COMPARED TO HOW MUCH HEALTH
INSURANCE AND RETIREMENT COSTS
HAVE BEEN RISING.
>> Woodruff: I HAVE ANOTHER
EXAMPLE.
THIS IS A MAN WHO WAS INJURED ON
THE JOB, IN THIS CASE OKLAHOMA.
HE HURT PIZ BACK LIFTING HEAVY
RUBBER MATERIAL, PUTTING IT ON
SPOOLS.
HIS NAME IS JOHN COFFELL.
>> WE LIVE PAYCHECK TO PAYCHECK.
WE HAVE OUR BUDGET SET AND
ANYTHING THAT OFFSETS THE BUDGET
IS GOING TO HURT US SEVERELY.
>> AS SOON AS HE GOT HURT, WE
WENT FROM BEING IN A HOUSE WITH
THE KIDS AND BEING A HAPPY
FAMILY TO EVERYTHING JUST
FALLING APART, IN ONE SWIFT
MOTION.
I MEAN, IT REALLY FELT LIKE
SOMEBODY JUST SHOOK EVERYTHING
IN OUR LIVES AND SCATTERED IT
ALL OVER THE PLACE.
>> Woodruff: SO HOWARD
BURKESS, THIS IS NOT ATYPICAL
FOR THESE INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE
HURT, AND WHAT WE'VE LEARNED IS
THERE'S A WIDE DISCREPANCY FROM
STATE TO STATE IN TERMS OF HOW
MUCH PEOPLE GET FOR THE KIND OF
INJURY THEY HAVE.
>> OH, YEAH.
AND THIS IS REALLY APPARENT WHEN
YOU TALK ABOUT CATASTROPHIC
INJURIES LIKE ARM AMPUTATIONS.
SO WE LOOKED AT-- WE VISITED
WITH TWO WORKERS, FOR EXAMPLE,
BOTH LIVING NEAR THE
ALABAMA-GEORGIA BORDER.
ON THE ALABAMA SIDE OF THE
BORDER, THE WORKER WHO LOST HIS
ARM IN AN INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT
LOOKED LIKE HE WOULD GET MAYBE
ABOUT $48,000, MAXIMUM, IN HIS
LIFETIME AS COMPENSATION FOR HIS
INJURY IN WEEKLY PAYMENTS AND
COMPENSATION FOR THE LOSS OF HIS
ARM.
BUT JUST ACROSS THE BORDER IN
GEORGIA, THE WORKER THERE WHO
HAD A NEARLY IDENTITYICAL INJURY
AND AN ARM AMPUTATION, NEARLY
IDENTICAL AGE AT THE TIME OF HIS
INJURY, HE'LL GET SOMEWHERE IN
THE NEIGHBORHOOD OF $700,000
MORE OVER THE COURSE OF HIS
LIFETIME.
THAT'S IF HE DOESN'T GO BACK TO
WORK.
AND THE DIFFERENCE IS THAT IN
ALABAMA IT'S CONSIDERED A
PARTIAL DISABILITY LOSING AN
ARM.
IN GEORGIA IT'S CONSIDERED A
CATASTROPHIC INJURY, SOMETHING
THAT IS GOING TO AFFECT YOU FOR
THE REST OF YOUR LIFE.
THERE ARE DRAMATIC DIFFERENCES
FROM STATE TO STATE, AND THAT'S
WHAT SOME PEOPLE SEE AS THE
INHERENT UNFAIRNESS OF THIS
SYSTEM.
BUT FOR THE STATE LINE, ONE
WORKER MIGHT BE TAKEN CARE OF.
ANOTHER MIGHT BE IN FINANCIAL
RUIN.
>> Woodruff: MICHAEL GRABELL,
JUST QUICKLY, IS THERE ANY MOVE
UNDER WAY TO TRY TO EVEN THIS
OUT AROUND THE COUNTRY?
>> WELL, THERE'S BEEN SOME
ATTENTION FROM THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT, BUT-- AND OSHA, BUT
OBVIOUSLY, THESE ARE STATE
PROGRAMS, AND THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT HAS VERY LITTLE
CONTROL OVER WHAT STATES DO.
THERE'S A LITTLE BIT OF A PUSH
WITH THE-- THEY'RE CONCERNED
ABOUT COST SHIFTING TO THINGS
LIKE SOCIAL SECURITY DISABILITY
AND MEDICARE TO PERHAPS ADDRESS
THOSE PROBLEMS.
BUT HOPEFULLY, OUR STORIES WILL
SHINE SOME LIGHT ON THIS AND
CREATE SOME ATTENTION.
YOU KNOW, LAWMAKERS TOLD US IF
THEY THE STORIES THAT WE POINTED
OUT ARE A PATTERN, IT'S
SOMETHING THEY WANTED TO TAKE A
LOOK AT.
>> Woodruff: AND FINALLY
MICHAEL GRABELL, YOU BOTH WERE
TELLING ME THAT THERE'S A
CONSTITUENCY FOR BUSINESS
ARGUING FOR THESE CHANGES IN
STATE LEGISLATURES BUT NO REAL
CONSTITUENCY REPRESENTING
WORKERS.
>> YEAH, ONE THING THAT WE HEARD
OVER AND OVER AGAIN, YOU KNOW,
IS BUSINESSES SEEM TO HAVE THE
EAR OF THE LEGISLATURES MAKING
THESE CHANGES, AND THERE'S
REALLY NO CONSTITUENCY FOR THE
FUTURE INJURED WORKER BECAUSE
MOST PEOPLE DON'T THINK ABOUT
GETTING HURT UNTIL IT HAPPENS.
>> Woodruff: MICHAEL GRABELL
AND HOWARD BURKESS, IT'S A VERY
POWERFUL SERIES OF STORIES.
WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> Ifill: SINCE THE THE TURN OF
THE LAST CENTURY P.T. BARNUM HAS
BEEN KNOWN FOR SPECTACLE, BIG
TOP SHOWS, AND ELEPHANTS.
BUT THE ANIMALS' TREATMENT,
OFTEN CRITICIZED AS CRUEL, HAS
BEEN THE SUBJECT OF EVER
WIDENING LAWSUITS AND SCRUTINY.
TODAY, RINGLING BROTHE &RS
BARNUM & BAILEY CIRCUS BOWED OUT
OF THE FIGHT, ANNOUNCING THAT BY
2018, ALL ELEPHANT PERFORMANCES
WILL END.
RINGLING'S PARENT COMPANY OWNS
43 OF THE PACHYDERMS-- 13 STILL
TOURING AND PERFORMING IN 1,000
SHOWS A YEAR.
THE HUMANE SOCIETY WAS ONE OF
THE ANIMAL RIGHTS GROUPS
PRESSURING THE COMPANY.
ITS PRESIDENT, WAYNE PACELLE,
JOINS ME NOW.
MANY OF US HAVE BEEN TO THE
CIRCUS AND WE DON'T SEE WHAT THE
PROBLEM IS.
WHAT'S THE PROBLEM?
>> WELL, THERE'S WHAT HAPPENS IN
THE THREE RINGS BUT REALLY THE
BIG STORY AND THE BACKSTORY IS
WHAT HAPPENS TO ANIMALS THAT ARE
IN TRAINING, WHERE THEY'RE
COERCIVELY TRAINED.
THEY'RE DOMINATED, SOMETIMES HIT
WITH BULL HOOKS WHICH IS A BROOM
HANDLE WITH A SHARP METAL OBJECT
AT THE END OF IT.
THEY'RE OFTEN ON CHAINS FOR 20
OR 22 HOURS A DAY.
AND THEY'RE REALLY SENT ON BOX
CARS, ON RAILROADS TO 100, 115
CITIES A YEAR.
SO THEY'RE GOING FROM DETROIT TO
MILWAUKEE, TO MINNEAPOLIS.
THAT'S NO LIFE FOR AN ELEPHANT.
THESE ARE HIGHLY INTELLIGENT,
SOCIABLE ANIMALS.
IN THE WILD THEY MIGRATE 40
MILES A DAY.
THEY LIVE WITH THE MOTHERS AND
GRANDMOTHERS AND BABIES.
UN, LIFE ON A CHAIN TO DO A
SILLY STUNT, I THINK A LOT OF
PEOPLE QUESTION IN 2015 WHETHER
THAT IS AN APPROPRIATE ACTIVITY.
>> Ifill: NOW THE HUMANE
SOCIETY HAS BEEN PART OF THIS
LEGAL COMPLAINT OVER THE YEARS.
THERE ARE NOW ONLY 13, AS I JUST
SAID, OF THESE ELFANTS
PERFORMING.
IT SEEMS THAT THIS IS MORE
SYMBOLIC THAN HAVING AN ACTUAL
EFFECT.
>> WELL, THERE ARE A LOT OF
ISSUES WE WORK ON THAT DEAL WITH
LOTS OF ANIMALS.
WHEN WE DEAL WITH FACTORY FARMS
AND THE CONFINEMENT OF ANIMALS
IN GESTATION CRAITS OR OUTLAW
COCKFIGHTING, THIS IS A SMALL
NUMBER OF ANIMALS BUT VERY
SIGNIFICANT FOR US, BECAUSE
RINGLING BROTHERS HAS BEEN A
STRONG ADVERSARY FOR THE HUMANE
SOCIETY.
THEY HAVE FOUGHT US AT THE LOCAL
LEVEL, STATE LEVEL, AND FEDERAL
LEVEL, AND I THOUGHT, FRANKLY,
THIS WOULD BE ONE OF THE LAST
GROUPS TO FOLD IN TERMS OF
EXPLOITATIVE PRACTICES.
I THINK THE "BLACK FISH"
DOCUMENTARY ABOUT SEAWORLD WAS A
BIG MOMENT IN HAVING PEOPLE
REFLECT ON WHETHER WE SHOULD BE
KEEPING THE MOST INTELLIGENT
WILD ANIMALS IN SMALL TANKS OR
THREE-RIPPING CIRCUSES.
>> DID THE CIRCUS CONCEDE ANY
MISTREATMENT IN FOLDING, TO USE
YOUR TERMS.
>> IN TODAY'S ANNOUNCEMENT THEY
SAID THEIR CUSTOMERS BEGAN TO
REALLY QUESTION ABOUT WHAT WAS
GOING ON WITH THE ELFANTS.
>> Ifill: THEY SAID THEY
DIDN'T WANT TO GO FROM
JURISDICTION TO JURISDICTION
FIGHTING DIFFERENT BATTLES BUT I
DIDN'T HEAR THEM SAY, "WE ADMIT
WE WERE ABUSING THESE ELFANTS."
>> I THINK THEY EXPLICITLY SAID
MANY OF THEIR CUSTOMERS WERE
CONCERNED ABOUT THE TREATMENT OF
THE ELFANTS.
NOT TO SAY.
A SPECIFIC INCIDENT OF ABUSE BUT
SHOULD ELFANTS BE USED TO DO
STUNTS WHEN SHE'S ARE THE
BIGGEST LAND MAMMALS IN THE
WORLD.
THEY ARE SO SMART.
22 HOURS A DAY ON CHAINS.
THIS IS NOT 1950 OR 1900.
THIS IS A NEW ERA FOR
CONSIDERATION OF ANIMAL DISPLEZ
2018 IT ALL ENDS.
WAYNE PACELLE OF THE HUMANE
SOCIETY, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, GWEN.
>> Woodruff: STAY WITH US, YOU
WON'T WANT TO MISS OUR NEXT
REPORTS.
TWO LOVABLE MEN TEAM UP IN THE
HOLOCAUST SURVIVOR BAND.
AND, BREATHTAKING IMAGES OF ICE
CAVES.
BUT FIRST, IT'S PLEDGE WEEK ON
PBS.
THIS BREAK ALLOWS YOUR PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATION TO ASK FOR
YOUR SUPPORT.
AND THAT SUPPORT HELPS KEEP
PROGRAMS LIKE OURS ON T
>> Ifill: NOW, A REMARKABLE
STORY OF TWO MEN WHO LIVE LIFE
TO THE FULLEST-- BY PLAYING
MUSIC.
IT COMES TO US FROM THE "NEW
YORK TIMES" VIDEO SERIES, "OP-
DOCS."
>> MY NAME IS SAUL DREIER AND
I'M PLAYING THE DRUMS.
>> MY NAME WEN RUBY
SOSNOWICZ, AND I'M A KEYBOARD
PLAYER ON THE ACCORDION.
>> THE NAME OF OUR BAND IS,
"HOLOCAUST SURVIVOR BAND."
>> "HOLOCAUST SURVIVOR BAND."
>> I CALLED RUBY, AND I SAID,
"RUBY, I HAVE AN IDEA."
MY WIFE SAYS, YOU'RE CRAZY."
MY RABBI, "SAUL, YOU'RE TOO OLD
FOR IT.
WHAT TO YOU NEED IT FOR?"
I SAID, "I GOT ORCHESTRA."
>> THERE WOULD BE NO ONE TO PLAY
FOR EVERYBODY.
>> I DIDN'T BELIEVE THAT I'M
GOING TO BE 89 YEARS OLD AND
COME OUT FROM RETIREMENT AND
PLAYING DRUMS WITH ORCHESTRA.
IT'S TRUE.
SOMEBODY UP THERE TOLD ME WHAT
TO DO.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND THAT MAKES HIM ALIVE.
>> WE NEVER MESS UP.
>> HE SHOULD WATCH WHAT I'M
DOING AND WE'LL BE OKAY.
UPON.
>> YOU HAVE TO BE A MUSICIAN AND
USE A LITTLE OIL IN YOUR HEAD.
>> I AM MORE ATTRACTIVE BECAUSE
WITH MY AGE.
SHE'HE'S MORE ATTRACTIVE BECAUSF
HIS LOOKS.
SOMETIMES THEY ASK ME IF I'M
MARRIED.
>> YEAH.
>> MY NUMBER WAS 84650.
I WAS IN CAMP WITH A VERY FAMOUS
CANTOR SINGER.
WE WERE LAYING ON OUR BED, AND
HE STARTED TO SING, AND WE WOULD
HAVE NO INSTRUMENTS SO EVERYBODY
WAS DOING SOMETHING ELSE.
WE HAD SPOONS.
>> WE DIDN'T HAVE NOTHING TO
EAT, BUT WHEN WE HEARD MUSIC,
THAT MAKE OUR LIFE.
>> AND THAT MADE ME TO PLAY
MUSIC.
>> THE MELODY SOUND LIKE I'M
LIVING IN MY OLD LIFE BEFORE THE
HOLOCAUST.
LA-LA-LA-LA
>> THAT'S IT!
GOOD-BYE!
LET'S GET OUT OF HERE.
>> Woodruff: HEARTWARMING.
AND YOU CAN SEE MORE VIDEOS LIKE
THAT AT NYTIMES.COM/OPDOCS.
>> Ifill: FINALLY, TO OUR
"NEWSHOUR SHARES" OF THE DAY.
SOMETHING THAT CAUGHT OUR EYE
THAT MIGHT BE OF INTEREST TO
YOU, TOO.
TONIGHT: THE WICKED WINTER THAT
STRUCK AGAIN TODAY IN AT LEAST
20 STATES HAS ALSO LEFT IN ITS
WAKE SOMETHING QUITE BEAUTIFUL:
ACCESS TO A RARE NATURAL
SPECTACLE IN BAYFIELD,
WISCONSIN.
LAST WEEKEND NEARLY 12,000 SIGHT
SEESERS AT A NATIONAL LAKESHORE
PUT ON THEIR PARKARCHS STRAPPED
ON THEIR CLEATS AND SKATES AND
SET OUT ACROSS A FROZEN LAKE
SUPERIOR.
THEIR GOAL-- TO WITNESS DRAMATIC
ICE-COVERED SEA CAVES IN AND THE
SANDSTONE CLIFFS LINING THE
GREAT LAKE.
ACCESSIBLE BY BOAT IN WARMER
MONTHS, THE CAVES CAN ONLY BE
REACHED ON FOOT WHEN WINTER
CONDITIONS CREATE ICE THICK AND
STABLE ENOUGH TO BEAR THE WEIGHT
OF VISITORS.
IT'S A PHENOMENON THAT'S ONLY
HAPPENED THREE TIMES SINCE 2009.
STILL, ONCE THERE,ARE
PRIVY TO BREATHTAKING VIEWS OF
ICICLES, ICE CRYSTALS AND EVEN
CURTAINS OF ICE THAT APPEAR TO
FLOW FROM THE CAVE WALLS.
>> Woodruff: BEAUTIFUL.
AGAIN, THE MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS OF
THE
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
A LATE-WINTER SNOWSTORM COVERED
A LARGE SWATH OF THE SOUTH AND
NORTHEAST IN A DEEP BLANKET OF
SNOW.
SCHOOLS WERE CLOSED, THOUSANDS
OF FLIGHTS WERE CANCELED AND
HUNDREDS OF DRIVERS WERE
STRANDED ON TWO MAJOR HIGHWAYS
IN KENTUCKY.
IT WAS REPORTED THIS EVENING
THAT ACTOR HARRISON FORD WAS
TAKEN TO A HOSPITAL IN CRITICAL
CONDITION FOLLOWING A PLANE
CRASH.
FORD WAS FLYING THE PLANE AND
THE ONLY PERSON ON BOARD.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, STUDENTS AT THE HAWAII
ACADEMY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES
TURNED A PROBLEM INTO A CLASS
PROJECT.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT
VETERANS IN VIETNAM TRYING TO
HEAL THE WOUNDS OF WAR.
50 YEARS AFTER THE CONFLICT
BEGAN.
>> Ifill: FOR ALL OF US HERE AT
THE PBS NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND
GOOD NIGHT.